I see him here like Elisha,
like those Old Testament prophets
He was sitting on the planks,
bound in chains.
He had the power to expel
evil spirits from people.
He is both holy and blessed.
At that time,
he was considered a prophet.
Are you Jozo Furundžija? He
raises his head and says: Yes, I am.
„ And why did you come to me?“
When we decided to make
a film about Jozo Furundžija
I didn't yet know the Pougarian mentality
the resourcefulness and endurance
of a Pougarian man that well.
But, shortly after I came
to Dobretići for the first time
It was still summer
according to the calendar
It was September 20
and it snowed.
We had to heat the car,
to heat the house where we slept
I realized how beautiful, but also often harsh
and inhospitable the Pougarian region was.
Equally difficult was the history
of the Pougarian people.
This region has
always been spiritually rich.
there were a lot of prayers, work
and a lot of faith.
Faith of these people is immense.
Because if a Pougarian man did not
have faith, he could not survive here.
They needed resourcefulness
and faithfulness to the Lord
the Church and the friars who
preserved the faith to survive.
Year that was a turning point
in the Bosnian Kingdom was 1463
when Sultan Mehmed the
Conqueror conquered Bosnia.
About 30,000 children and young people were
then taken as janissaries to Constantinople
Among them was the daughter of the
Bosnian nobleman Stjepan Dobreta, Ljiljana.
Stjepan Dobreta had his estates  around
present-day Foča, southeastern Bosnia - southern Serbia
Fleeing from the Sultan,
he ended up in today's Pougarje
which was well-protected at an altitude
of 1200 meters above sea level.
His daughter Ljiljana gained favor and entered
the harem as a noblewoman of Sultan El-Fatih,
she managed to obtain a land deed.
It was a document in the Turkish Empire
confirming the ownership of the area between
the Ilomska River, Ugra River and
the old towns of Komotina and Knežnica
belonging to her father,
Stjepan Dobreta.
We could already see the resourcefulness
that would later characterize these people
because during the Mehmed the Conqueror
the Pougarians, Catholics
like Fra Anđeo Zvizdović, were given permission
to stay and became co-owners of the land.
One interesting event is also
found in the writings and chronicles
of the parish priest
Vladimir Matijašević from Korićani
who said when the Turkish
oppression became so intense
one of those nobles and
descendants of Stjepan Dobrete
Martin Baltić Dobretić
and Fra Stipan Margitić
who is known for the standardization of the
national language and his famous Stipanuša
They dared to go on foot
to Constantinople to meet
with the Padishah Ahmed
III. and to remind him of the
contract his ancestor
had concluded with their forefather.
They traveled for two months, working along
the way to earn food, and reached Constantinople.
When the Sultan was passing by,
Martin Baltić thought of dressing up
in Turkish attire and placed
four lighted candles on his head.
He immediately stood out among
the crowd, and the Sultan noticed him.
He managed to push his way through;
the guards brought him
He knelt before the Sultan, kissed
his foot, and said he was coming from
great distress to ask him to listen to him,
and the Sultan granted him an audience.
He told him to come tommorow to the court,
where he would be admitted with his entourage.
He explained to the Sultan the plight of the
Catholics in Pougarje but also reminded him that
his great-grandfather Mehmed
the Conqueror gave that land deed to
his great-grandfather Stjepan
Dobreta, which is no longer respected.
Sultan swore before his whole entourage
that he would renew that land deed.
However, Martin was not
satisfied with that solution.
He told the Sultan that when he came before
the Judge of Jajce with that land deed
he would have his head cut off and destroy
that land deed as physical evidence.
The Sultan then asked him what he proposed.
Martin suggested that the land
deed be tattooed on his back.
Here, we see what resourcefulness that was.
The Sultan agreed to this
even though he was surprised.
The land deed was tattooed along
with his signature and seal on his back.
When he came to Jajce,
he brought it in a paper form
Then he took off his shirt and
showed it to the Judge of Jajce
conveying warm greetings
from Sultan Ahmed III.
Interesting fact for Pougarians that it is said:
"Whoever seeks something here finds it."
Pougarian man has always been
reserved towards foreigners but also open.
When a foreigner would come
and pass through a village;
If it was night, people would invite him first
to have a drink and something to eat.
Then if they saw he was okay,
they'd let him spend the night.
If a stranger was looking for
bread here, he could always find it.
If he was looking for a
beating, he could find that too.
So, whoever asked for something got it.
And it was a widespread occurrence
that the friars who would come to Pougarje,
like in other parts of Bosnia, had
to pretend to be part of the family.
That's why they were called
"uncles" so that when they came,
the children wouldn't accidentally
reveal them to the Turks.
They were dressed in clothes like other family members.
They even wore mustaches and often had red fez.
Masses were held in the woods,
which was easy to do in the summer months
during those two or three summer months
that summer lasted in Pougarje.
However, in the winter, it often rained, snowed,
was cold, windy, and then they would put up planks.
The priest would celebrate mass there. Above him,
they would hang goat skin so he wouldn't get wet.
And it was so cold that
they kept stones in the fire
Then wrapped those hot stones in
rags and put them in the priest's hands
so that they wouldn't freeze so he could
perform the mass and turn the missal.
All that time, the people were
wet, exposed to the wind, and cold
Despite this, they tried to
celebrate the Holy Mass regularly.
Thanks to that faith, that spirituality,
this region has a saint today.
Jozo Furundžija was born on September 11, 1857, in the
Pougarje village of Gornji Orašac, Dobretići parish.
As it was customary at that time that an unbaptized
child could not spend the night in the house,
he was immediately
baptized on the same day.
He was baptized by Pavo Miličević, the parish
priest at the time in Pougarje, in Dobretići.
Surname Furundžija is rare.
His parents were Ivan and Mara Čulija.
They were peasants.
The last name, Furundžija, is associated
with the "furine". Those were clay stoves.
Jozo's father made such stoves, and Jozo was
named Furundžija after this type of craft.
This is where Jozo's last name
comes from, after clay ovens ("furina").
We don't know much about Jozo's life.
What is known is from parish books
and the records kept by the
parish priests at the time.
He lived in a tough time.
There was great poverty then.
Bare survival only from farming and cattle
breeding. Only a few lived from a trade.
Most was written about him by the then parish priest,
the Franciscan Miroslav Džaja from Kupres.
We know from his records
that Jozo was a weak student.
In his youth, he was not
interested in anything.
He was a big swearer.
Not only did he insult God once. He invented
curses to insult God as much as possible.
For example, he insulted God as many times
as there were blades of grass in the meadow.
He liked to drink and liked fights and quarrels,
which were characteristic of all young people then.
A member of our parish was
Jozo Furundžija, a reveler.
I haven't found anywhere an
inscription saying someone was a reveler.
For a while, he worked as an assistant to a priest
and lived as a subtenant with an old woman.
Jozo decided not to marry and
he stuck to it until the end of his life.
One Sunday he was at mass.
He heard preaching, and it seemed to
him as if the priest was speaking directly to him.
At that mass, parish priest said that Jesus
was stabbed in the side by some "londžija" (thug).
He was always in his own little world
and didn't listen to anyone then.
He understood that
Furundžija stabbed Jesus in the side.
So Jozo ran out of the church and
headed down to the villages of Pougarje.
And he came to some rocks near the village
of Zapeće and wanted to end his life.
He thought about how to do it, so he
decided to look for a rope and to hang himself.
Then he had a vision where a young man, probably an angel, appeared to him and started to dissuade him from doing it.
He dissuaded Jozo saying that he should
deter the people from evil, from suicide.
Jozo obeyed this young man,
left the rope and went home.
His house was in Orašac,
the neighboring village of Zapeće.
Since then, he has been
at the service of the people.
Jozo experienced his
conversion similar to St. Paul.
The sinful part of life and
this mystical saintly part of life.
Jozo's activity was here in three parishes:
Dobretići, Podmilačje and Jajce.
From that moment, he decided to change
his life and devote himself to God entirely.
He began to mortify himself,
to do penance.
It is also known that Jozo ate bread
that was sprinkled with ashes.
He did not want to eat fresh bread,
but the older bread sprinkled with ashes.
That's how he did his penance,
how he mortified himself.
It is said that he always had
chains around him
That he girded himself with chains,
slept on the bare floor.
That he often fasted and
did other penance.
He did penances in prayer,
various acts and chaining himself.
Jozo, chained like that, went down on his knees
to the church in Podmilačje.
The church was locked,
but after Jozo arrived there on his knees,
It took him many days
on his knees bound with chains;
The church doors opened for him by themselves
and Jozo entered the church kneeling.
I remember they talked about some
thirty or forty kilometers he went
He chose the most challenging route.
Interesting thing and a good incentive
for people who are converted
Who pray a lot is that asceticism must lead
to the apostolate, to serving people.
There is a tradition that God clearly
showed Jozo through the ox that spoke
That he shouldn't just pray for himself but engage
in the apostolate and proclaim this faith to others.
This is a good example for
people today who understand prayer
as something privately and
do not act evangelistically.
Yes, there is that story about
the ox that Jozo once saw.
He had gone outside
and returned to his room
Then he had a vision of an ox
lying and chewing cud in his room.
That ox said to Jozo: why are you
staring at me? What are you waiting for?
Why are you lying down, not doing anything?
You are just like this ox chewing cud.
This prompted Jozo towards
apostolate, and through this story,
Jozo considered himself ordained for apostleship
and felt the need to preach the gospel further.
When people came to ask him for advice,
he would prophetically speak to them.
This is my father's story
He passed it on to me.
I was named after my grandfather Matija
Matija had a living testimony that
he used to go to Jozo Furundžija.
At that time,
Jozo was considered a prophet
When someone was in trouble, or
something undesirable happened
They would seek advice
and help from Jozo.
So, my grandfather lived at the
bottom of the village of Šimenice
and his brother Stipan
lived at the top of the village.
They were closely tied as a
family, inseparable brothers
They always prayed together in the
evening, coming up or down to each other.
As time went by, waiting for each other
to come, neither came
The evening prayer was not said regularly,
and livestock began to die slowly.
Sheep died, goats died
and calves died.
And now the grandfather in
trouble didn't know what to do.
And since Jozo always helped,
he decided to go to Jozo.
From Šibenica to Orašac
is more than 30 km.
There was no transportation and my
grandfather saddled the horse and went to Jozo.
As he arrived in Orašac,
in front of the house
Jozo from the house
called out: "Matija, come in."
My grandfather was puzzled and stopped:
How does he know my name?
"Come in, Matija;
I know why you came"
"Your livestock is dying, your sheeps
are dying, your goats are dying."
"It is because you don't
pray to God regularly"
"You are at the bottom of the village
and your brother is at the top."
"You are waiting for each other and
don't pray the regular evening prayer to God."
Grandfather returned home and
they continued to follow what Jozo said:
"Whoever is down in the house should pray,
whoever is up there should pray"
"Don't wait for each other,
you must pray regularly."
As he returned, he told his brother that
and they obeyed what Jozo said
And then the sacrifices stopped,
the damages ceased.
So, Jozo knew their situation exactly
and he didn't know any of them?
That's right
He had never seen my grandfather before,
nor had my grandfather been to him
There is one event about my great-grandfather,
Ilija Aščić, who was supposed to have a baby.
However, his wife couldn't give birth.
They were persuading him to go to his
cousin Jozo for advice and some medicine.
He said:"Why should I go to him?
He knows like my mare."
But his wife couldn't give birth;
the child wouldn't come out.
And he broke down inside himself
and went to his cousin Jozo Furundžija
When Jozo saw him,
he shouted from afar:
"Cousin, why are you coming to me when
even your mare knows better than I do?"
He knew that, as God told him,
he had "God's phone".
Jozo said to him: "Go home;
your wife will survive"
"However, the bed will be bloody
and the child will be dead."
And that's what happened.
His wife survived, but the child
that was to be born was stillborn.
What kind of charisma did he have?
Jozo had the power of bilocation
to be in two places simultaneously.
He knew how to move from the spiritual
to the material world and vice versa.
He managed to see what happened in the past
and what would happen in the future.
He had the gift of prophesying
the thoughts of hearts.
Jozo used all these gifts to serve people.
He probably had even more gifts.
My mother-in-law had pneumonia
or inflammation in her lungs.
Her mom went to Jozo Furundžija
and made a vow, and she went to Jozo.
Jozo said to her:
"Aga"
"She should eat snails for forty mornings"
"She should take the snail out and
eat the bitter part."
"Agata will recover."
She had a cousin who
ate the snails with her.
And my mother-in-law
recovered, and she told me about it.
And she didn't have any
more problems afterward?
No.
My grandfather was born in 1898.
He was 16 years old
before the First World War.
He was sickly,
he had some health problems
and his parents took him
to Jozo regarding his health.
Also, out of fear, because the
First World War was approaching,
mobilizations were expected,
and they were afraid for their son.
So they went to Jozo for a
prescription for his health and advice.
And so Jozo helped them,
regarding health,
he gave grandfather some herbal tea,
which helped him, later he had no health issues.
Regarding their fear
of mobilization, he said:
"Don't worry, they will call
him, but he will return alive"
he won't be in dangerous places.
And was it like that?
That's how it was, yes. Grandfather
lived, and they had fourteen children;
He died at the age of 95.
He it was who gave me sure knowledge of what exists, to understand the structure of the world and the action of the elements
the beginning, end and middle of the times, the alternation of the solstices and the succession of the seasons
the cycles of the year and the position of the stars; the natures of animals and the instincts of wild beasts
the powers of spirits and human mental processes, the varieties of plants and the medical properties of roots.
And now I understand everything, hidden or visible, for Wisdom, the designer of all things, has instructed me. Wisdom 7:17-21
for Wisdom, the designer of all things, has instructed me.
He had the power to expel
evil spirits from people.
Jozo used that gift in his interactions with
people who came to him from other parishes:
Podmilačje, Jajce, Dobretići, but also
from central Bosnia - Travnik.
He was a worker and he worked for
Elektrobosna for 12 years.
That's a company here in Jajce.
Besides being a diligent worker and good
at all the jobs needed for the company.
He also managed to influence
the workers and his colleagues
Which is confirmed by
two stories from the book.
These are the story about a malfunction
at Elektrobosna and a story about a wagon.
What exactly happened with that malfunction?
It was Saint John's Day, so
people needed to go to Mass
and as they knew about
Jozo and Jozo's power
they asked him to do something
so they could go to Mass.
And Jozo promised to do something.
Jozo prayed to God, and severe storms
happened, rainstorms and thunderstorms
which led to the blockage of drains and canals
that prevented the company from working
and then people of any confession
or religion could leave their jobs.
Those who needed to go
to Mass could go to Mass.
And the story about the wagon, what exactly is it about?
The story is about one
wagon of Elektrobosna.
The wagons were used to transport
ore and material for the company.
That wagon couldn't move. Then
Jozo said he would do something
He prayed and managed to start the wagon.
He told that it was Satan himself who was under
the wagon that prevented the wagon from moving.
Jozo was able to remove
that defect by praying.
So, he testifies at his job?
Was he bold in proclaiming?
Yes, just as he was up there in Pougarje,
he was the same  at work.
He was dirty black.
Children were out, he was leaving the
factory, and he was dirty black from work.
He was going on foot;
there were no vehicles then.
So children yelled to each other:
"Come on, come out, come, see!"
calling each other by name, "Come and see
this man who is coming, how ugly he is..."
"Yes, I am, children, but even
the devil is afraid of me."
After he converted,
people used to offend him:
"Well, we know you, you have no right
to tell us anything, we know who you are."
So, he used to insult God before, but
now he suffers and endures insults for God.
They insulted him
until the end of his life.
My grandmother got married
very young, at 17
She was married for four
years and didn't have children
People from the village recommended
her to go to Jozo Furundžija
as he was known for healing people and
helping them, to see if he could help her.
So she and her neighbor Ivka, who
also didn't have children, agreed to go.
On the way to Jozo, as they traveled, they
talked about what each of them brought
and my grandmother said: I knitted him
woolen socks and brought cheese and eggs.
Ivka told her she had a mother-in-law, and
my grandmother didn't have a mother-in-law;
she said: "My mother-in-law gave
me five eggs, and I was ashamed,
so I took five more without askingher."
And she also brought cheese.
When they arrived, there was a
very long line of people in front
They waited and
when it was their turn
he was sitting on boards, chained,
and asked them why they had come.
My grandma said: "I've
been married for four years
I don't have children,
that it's hard for me."
He looked at her and said: "Don't
worry; God will bless you with children."
I think he told her she would
have four girls and eight boys.
Jozo also told Ivka how
many children she would have.
My grandmother gave him what
she had brought, and he thanked her.
And Ivka did the same. However, he
took Ivka's eggs and sorted them out.
They were surprised at what he was doing.
He took five out of those ten,
returned them to Ivka and said:
"You took these without
asking; give them back.
And so, thank God my
grandmother returned to Bugojno.
After a year, she gave birth to her
first son and continued to give birth.
We decided to pray three Our Fathers or
another prayer, at will, for blessed Jozo
Then he said: "Don't pray for me; pray
for my parents; my parents are not saved."
That's what my mother-in-law told me.
One man died from rakija (brandy);
He is from the same village as my mother-in-law.
And his sons went to ask Jozo:
"What would you do, Jozo? How
would you pray? Would you pay Masses?"
Then he said: "He wasn't saved; he
died from alcohol; he died from brandy."
So Jozo said that he was not saved and that
there was no need to pray, then? - Yes.
How did the clergy perceive it then?
Jozo Furundžija was a layman
and now he begins to preach
the faith, and people come to him.
Were the friars who were in
the parish then skeptical about it?
How did they view the whole
phenomenon around Jozo?
Especially considering the interest
of the people who were coming to him?
Clergy viewed it with contempt,
maybe with silence and some rejection
They were not interested in
Jozo or what Jozo was doing at all.
That is still the case today. If someone
rises above the ordinary, the average.
Then he either falls into trouble,
into silence or has conflicts.
As the Holy Scripture says, Jesus had the most problems with the priests, scribes, and the Pharisees.
Jozo often had problems with the
friars who served here in this parish.
The friars didn't quite agree with
his way of life and his teachings.
It's difficult for us to accept
another teaching, another spirituality.
And Jozo had his spirituality, his teachings;
he had his life of penance.
If they forbid Jozo from doing
that, if they hindered him in his plan
Then they would be making
Jozo an advertisement
and that would cause people
to pray and convert even more.
So people were going to Jozo when he was
alive, but also to his grave
because Jozo said that he
would help them, alive and dead.
The child was healthy; he
spoke typically for his age.
He went to the spring for water, and
Jozo's mare was grazing near the spring.
He came near the mare and she hit him in
the chest. As she hit him, she threw him.
And he lost his breath;
he could not speak at all.
Suddenly, I was struck dumb;
I came home unable to speak,
My mother and father promised
to carry me to Jozo's grave.
They did that for three years;
they carried me up to Jozo's grave.
We didn't go to a doctor but
straight to Saint John in Podmilačje.
From Saint John to Saint Anthony in Pougarje,
from Saint Anthony to Jozo's grave.
Well, I can only remember
that I was little then.
Then, when we came to Jozo's
grave for the third time, we prayed there
Fulfilled our vow, walked around the grave,
took the child and started walking home.
I remember the pilgrimage to Jozo Furundžija's
place that I experienced and got well.
The child started to speak
as if nothing happened;
he had no idea that something had
gone wrong; everything was as it should be.
My mother told me:
"Ivica, you went to Jozo's grave and
couldn't speak and now you can even yap."
I said: "I know, mother."
He was interested in politics and was not apolitical at all.
We can see that he was a genuinely engaged lay faithful.
I read in the book about his involvement
in the 1910 elections in Pougarje.
He took a side and was quite
fierce and passionate about that issue
Yes, 1910 was an election year, and the
Croats were then divided into two parties
Similar to today, when there are elections or
no elections, the Croats are always divided.
One party was the Croatian Catholic Association,
and the other was the Croatian Community.
Jozo Furundžija was a fervent supporter of association led by the auxiliary bishop of Sarajevo, Šarić
The Croatian community was led by a prominent
Sarajevo lawyer, legal expert Dr. Jozo Sunarić.
And thanks to Jozo's merit and influence,
the association got more votes in Dobretići
than this community represented by the parish
priest and neighboring priests and clergymen.
My mother vowed to go
to Jozo Furunđija's grave
because I had huge problems
with my teeth when I was little.
There were also situations
when I would lose consciousness
So we can say that it is a mercy
that it stopped, and I felt better.
The story about this, I would say, unusual man
was present in our family, in our village.
I'm from Mijatovići, a
neighboring village to Orašac
where Jozo Furundžija
lived and was later buried.
These stories were an integral part
of almost everyday conversations.
They were talked about and discussed.
These were not just ordinary tales
and stories retold over coffee or as a joke
These were instructive severe stories with a certain
catechetical aim, some sort of folk catechesis.
To teach the people of that
time, especially young people
That by emulating this example, they try to
nurture those Christian values in their lives.
Of course, a lot of what people had written
about Jozo was destroyed by this unfortunate war.
According to the stories that reached me
and are certainly known to the wider public,
especially to the people in
Pougarje, Jajce, and Travnik
some special things were happening,
we can freely say even some miraculous acts
precisely through the intercession
of this extraordinary man.
My sister was quite sick during
the first three years of her life.
Mom said that if she was well for
two weeks, the third week she wasn't
The third week, she always had to go for
injections, and that was ongoing for three years.
Mom had already lost hope
that the child would ever get well
Then one woman from
the village advised her:
"Why don't you take her
to Jozo's grave?"
Then, mom started carrying
her there a few times
and her health improved,
and to this day, she's okay.
I was at Jozo Furundžija's
grave; whatever illness finds me
I promise to go to Furundžija's grave. I
went barefoot and in shoes; it's far to walk.
God always helped me and blessed
Jozo Furundžija; I always got well.
My back was hurting, and I
had all sorts of health problems.
Whatever happens to me, as soon as
I leave the cemetery, that wish of mine comes true.
So you also had problems
with bleeding for a long time?
Yes, I was in the hospital.
And as soon as I went to Furundžija's
grave, I felt better immediately.
So dear God and Jozo healed me,
and I'm fine. I don't know about others.
I believe in God and Jozo. I say there's
no better for me than at Jozo Furundžija's.
Before I even thought about it,
I found out that my daughter had a tumor.
When I was 22 or 23 years old, I started
feeling some pain in my stomach and the pelvis
I ignored it, took some pills,
and so on until I fainted once.
Then I went to the doctor. They sent me to
a surgeon, then to an internist and a urologist
for various examinations
until finally to a gynecologist
who told me I had a
tumor the size of an orange.
From the beginning, I pretended
as if it wasn't happening to her
it couldn't be, she's young.
Then, it got even worse; I
fell into depression and fear.
I remember at that time, the only thing I was sorry
for was that I was going to die and I had no children.
My wife's uncle collected money for the construction
of a chapel near Jozo Furundžija's grave.
I said, let's trust in God and the prayer of
Jozo that she will get well and be fine.
And we gave that money.
I didn't even know that my dad
had given money for the chapel
When I did a tumor marker test, it was
perfectly fine, meaning a normal result.
She said that day, she
didn't know I had given money
that she felt a strange reaction in
her body, that it was indescribable.
She couldn't describe what
was happening to her body
Then, upon the next blood
test, the result was negative.
I went to Jozo's grave with my mom
when I was little, maybe 2-3 years old.
But before that, mom took my brother
Mijo there because he couldn't walk.
She made a vow and went
to Jozo Furundžija's grave.
When she returned from Jozo's grave from
Orašac, my brother Mijo started walking.
During the war, we fled, and I went
as a refugee to Germany to work
I worked in Berlin with my
father, mother, brother, and sister.
I worked there, and after a while, I had
a headache every Saturday and Sunday.
I was practically dying
from those headaches
Only a pill could help me a little.
And it was like that all the time, all
Saturdays, Sundays. And then I came back.
How long did those headaches last?
That lasted for three years,
as long as I was in Berlin.
When I returned to Tomislavgrad in 1996
I went to Jozo Furundžija's grave
I laid down on his grave; after that, when
I returned home, my headache was gone.
I never had a headache again.
I realized I was fine, and after that, I
raised a monument to Jozo Furundžija.
I raised a statue and mosaic
tiles in honor of Jozo Furundžija.
My son was sick; his ears
hurt; they were leaking.
I took him to the doctor; she
said he needed ten injections.
He was okay for a month, and then
again, the doctor and ten injections.
And it was going like
that for several times.
When his ears started
leaking for the third time
I looked at my child
and felt sorry for him.
I thought, why wouldn't I
take my child to blessed Jozo?
In the morning, my child woke up; nothing
was leaking, and it never did again.
When the first Tuesday came,
I took him to Jozo's grave.
And so, my child recovered, thank God. Today,
he is 35 years old, healthy, young, and works.
So many people come to his grave.
So many people pray at his grave.
So many people testify that through his
intercession, they received hearings from God.
I believe that is enough testimony
that he entered God's calendar as a saint.
There are many such stories
many people have healed through the
intercession and help of Jozo Furundžija.
Many of these stories, events, and healing
experiences have not been written down.
I have only collected a little and put it in
the book, and this book is just "the first cry."
He is both holy and blessed.
Jozo Furundžija was a great saint to me.
When she went again,
they told her the tumor was gone.
Why don't you take her to Jozo's grave?
Why wouldn't I take my child to blessed Jozo?
moja svekrva ozdravila
This region has a saint.
When Jozo died, they packed the chains
with him and buried them in his coffin.
The parish priest up in Pougarje
put the chains on his tombstone.
This year, the centenary of the death of this
folk saint, Jozo Furundžija, was celebrated.
Namely, Jozo died in 1922.
The mass was held at
Orašac this year on July 29
There were many believers, as you could
see in the report on Herceg Bosna television.
I read in the book that Jozo
requested his grave to be excavated
after 30 years to see
the condition of his body.
"Thirty years after my death, dig me
up, and you will see what form I am in."
Jozo wanted to emphasize that he wasn't a
fraud in life, nor won't be in death either.
You said there were over 1,000 people?
Well, someone says a 1000 or
a 1500 people; there were many people.
I think this area here has
never seen anything like that.
Jozo didn't make a distinction between people.
He helped both Orthodox Christians and Muslims
That's why his way of life and
his message are relevant today.
I saw that there were Muslims
and Orthodox Christians.
They heard about that celebration, they were well
informed and managed to set aside that one day,
so they came to Jozo's
grave and prayed to Jozo.
One of the criteria in the beatification process
is the sensus fidei, the sense in the people.
As a parish priest here, can you notice that the veneration
of Jozo and the word about Jozo are growing increasingly?
Yes. Since my childhood, more and more people have been going to Jozo's grave, especially on Tuesdays.
It's a bit of a paradox.
It may sound harsh, but thanks
to a dead man, life is born.
Thanks to his noble deeds that remained and
couldn't die.
Beautiful things arise now.
New things are born
Sometimes, we living people cannot do what the
deeds of some people who lived before us can.
In many ways, he is a luminous figure for this time. I hope
that God's providence has led us to this just at this time
when many Catholics live
trapped in swearing and alcohol
when many lay people should engage in apostolate and be
active in politics, witnessing at work, and promoting peace.
These are all qualities that Jozo had
Karl Rahner says that in the 21st century, Catholics
will either become mystics or not be at all.
Jozo is a shining example
of that mystical life.
We can say that nowadays,
he is very relevant.
What is your prediction? Since you may have dealt with
this bright figure the most, when will the process start?
The process of beatification
is a long process.
A process that requires sure evidence.
For now, we have people's testimonies.
Some testimonies are also written, and we also
have some legends and stories that people tell.
Now, the official church
needs to initiate it.
For me, it was surprising after the war to
see how people did not return to their homes
few have returned, but they
return to Jozo Furundžija.
"Blessed" Jozo, prays for us!
Prayer to Jozo Furundžija
Dear God, grant us the health of soul and body through
the intercession of our "blessed" Joz‭o. May his conversion
and great sacrifice to you encourage us to walk bravely
through our lives, preserve the health of soul and body,
serve you all our lives, and always humbly pray and turn to
you in all our life's needs. May the intercession of our
"blessed" Jozo always accompany us through life,  on all
our paths, in our work, and our homes. Help us to be better
people and Christians, to love Christ more, and to serve
His Church and our brethren. May his living faith always
help us in all our life's struggles until our eternal salvation.
Amen.
Producer
Directing Team
Young Pougarac
Editing
Camera
Local Guide
Production Assistants
Special Thanks
Archive Footage